PG: Well, I don't have a good memory of all this business. . . but had a lot of experience (laugh) with the Federal Theatre.
JO: I'd like to ask you about it, a number of things about it, what exactly your role was in terms of the North Carolina Playmakers and the Federal Theatre. Was the North Carolina Playmakers simply subsidized by the Federal Theatre or —
PG: Oh, no.
JO: — associated with it?
PG: No. The Playmakers were a University organization. They began here in 1918 and the Federal Theatre didn't come on until how long, 1935 or 1936?
MK: 1936.
PG: I don't remember when it started. When did it start?
MK: In fact, I read, in the summer of 1935 you made a talk out at Iowa at a National Theatre Conference and supposedly Harry Hopkins went out there for that and set up the Federal Theatre then.
PG: Oh, gosh.
MK: Like August 1935. Does that sound familiar?
PG: I remember, I think, Lawrence Tibbett, a great baritone singer-—his name has sort of perished—if that was the same meeting, he talked. And then there was a lot of time over at the Karanm House in Cleveland, the Negro theatre run by the Jelliffes. Dorothy [Maynor], the Negro singer, was there and I'm sure there was a lot of talk about the theatre generally. But I just don't remember what was said at Iowa. I remember Lawrence Tibbett. We were talking on arts and the theatre, the whole conglomerate. The truth is I just don't-—
MK: Was it about then that a theatre got dedicated to E. C. Mabie? Did that happen at a National Theatre Conference?
PG: That came a little later, I think. But I went out to Iowa several times.
They produced some of my folk plays out there and then I went out and did a seminar. I was out, I think, after Mabie got his theatre. He produced a play that I had that had a double ending and he played—there was a tragic ending and a comic or optimistic ending.
MK: Was that The House of Connelly?
PG: The House of Connelly.
MK: Oh, tell us about that.
PG: Well, I wrote it as a very dark tragedy and sent it to the Theatre Guild.
And I’ll be darned if I remember when it was written, 1930, 1931, or somewhere along there. And the Theatre Guild bought it. Then later the Group Theatre grew out of the Theatre Guild. They were sort of junior players. And I had a letter from Theresa Helburn, the director, saying that this young group wanted to do this play and they'd intended to do it as a Guild production. But they thought it might be something to launch this Group. And I said, "Well, whatever you say because, you know, I want to get it put on." So the Group took it over and they organized themselves and they met up in Connecticut, a dedicated crowd, all of them pretty much half drunk on the Stanislavski method. (Laugh) Anyway, it was a funny experience. Well, Harold Clurman and Cheryl Crawford and Lee Strasberg were the directors of this Group Theatre. And Harold was pretty strong and outspoken and in a way sort of submerged the other two so far as his dominant statements went although Lee could out-talk any of them. He'd get going for 40 minutes and hold forth and I didn't know any more at the end than at the beginning except that he talked a long time. But they were dedicated people and Harold said, "We want a" — this is not exactly apropos of your subject, but I'll go ahead and talk.
MK: Well, I think the Federal Theatre produced The House of Connelly later and the script we have has a happy ending.
PG: Yeah, that's right. Well, it didn't have a happy ending until Harold Clurman— and they were all very much affected by the optimisn of the Russian point of view. They weren't Communists but they were pretty radical and all pretty much tired of the American system that had thrown 'em all into this Depression. So they had some kind of a case against the United States. But they knew a lot more about Joe Stalin than they did Thomas Jefferson or George Washington. They knew a lot mere about the Russian theatre than they did, say, the history of the American theatre. The American theatre didn't have much history.
So Harold said — he used this phrase — "We're a yea-saying group, yea-saying, yea-saying. And we think your play ends in confusion and despair. We would like to have a yea-saying ending."
Well, he was very effective and I was as unstable as a camel in the wind. So I said, "Well, Harold, whatever you say." (Laugh)
MK: You know better. (Laugh)
PG: Yes. "Well," he said, "write us sane big speeches there at the end, seme big stuff. And," he said," you know, to be a success and all, you have to be cruel."
And I said, "Yeah, where did you get that?"
And he said, "Well, that's the way life is. And it's cruel for this young girl in the play maybe to take over and take the old system and turn it into the new poor white determinism and determination." He said, "Give her a good speech."
So I did, I wrote out a speech where she's talking to this weak fellow that she's in love with who owns the old mansion. And he says, "My God, to drive my listers from their own home! No, no." She says, she gets him by the hand and works her siren on him.
She says, "But Will, that's life. You have to be cruel sometimes. That's life." And he, poor fellow, he—so then these Negroes come in and they get ready to strangle her, which they did originally. And she grabs up a poker and is gonna knock hell out of 'em both. It was kinda phoney.
but that's the way we played it in New York. They liked that.
MK: They bought that, didn't they?
PG: I said, "But look, Harold, you go way back, all the portents and portendings in the early part. These old two Negro women are guardians of the house. They are sort of moralistic characters. They are the [Penates] that guard the hearth. And in the early part it foreshadows doom."
He said, "Well, we'll play it optimistically."
Well anyhow, to go back to Mabie. Mabie said that he wanted to put the play on. Anyway, the subject came up that there was another ending and he said, "I'd like to have a look at it." So he said, "Oh, I like this ending." And he said, "I tell you what we'll do. We'll play both endings. We'll play one ending and the audience knows there's another ending. And then we'll just turn right around and play the other ending and just fasten it off." And I said, "Well, I'll make you a bet." And he said, "What?", And I said, "Whichever ending is played first will be voted on by the audience as the one they prefer. Because the impact does something and then the second Impact is weakened by the precedence of the first impact. So the first impact you take the story and play it on through and — " I forget whether — I think he said, "We'll play the tragic ending first."
MK: That's more unified in many ways.
PG: Yeah. Anyway, whichever one he played first, the vote was great, oh, 70 to 30 in favor of the one they played first. It taught me a lot about critical judgment.
Well then later it was published in some different anthologies and John Gassner was down here and he said, "I understand you have another ending to that House of Connelly. I'd like to have it in. . . my. . ." So John published it, as I remember, with the tragic ending in one of his anthologies.
So that was the story. And I don't know about the Federal Theatre. It was produced in some places, but I don't know where.
MK: I might have a little -
JO: Do you now have a preference for one ending or the other?
PG: Oh, yeah, for the tragic ending because — but I was in a tragic mood then and wrote a lot of tragic one-act Negro plays, poor-white plays and so on.
But I guess—then when it was produced in Hollywood, I mean, I sold it to Hollywood, oh, man, they really made something out of that. Of course, they had the happy ending. The head of Twentieth Century Fox, when he—my agent said to me, "Fox would like to buy this script and get you to write the story." I said, "I won’t write the script. I'm tired of that. I'm workin' on something else." I was working with Will Rogers, the comedian, writing for him, and I liked it. He said, "Well, will you be adviser on the script?" And I said, "Yes."
They said, "We've got a man that's a humdinger." They didn't use the word "humdinger." "But he's just done a very popular Noel Coward thing called The Cavalcade with Diana Winyard and Clive Brook," way back before your time.
It was a great success. And they said, "He's a member of Parliament and he wrote the script for that. He's over here and we'll turn The House of Connelly over to him."
I thought, "Well, he doesn't know anything about tobacco and cotton."
MK: We have it down that The House of Connelly was put on in Indianapolis in early 1937.
PG: I wouldn't know.
MK: And it just had about a one-week run. It might have been produced some other places, but the script we have has the upbeat ending of Patsy taking over.
PG: Well, that's the one that was distributed mostly. I don't know where it was produced then. The Federal Theatre did a lot of one-act plays of mine, but I don’t know where.
MK: We have a script of White Dresses, but I don't know when it was ever put on.
PG: No, I don’t.
MK: Or End of Row. I don't really know about a play called End of Row that you wrote.
PG: The End of the Row. Oh, that's a one-act Negro play laid out in the fields.
I used to write them, oh, I wrote a whole volume of them in one week once. I was just full of it , and sent them somewhere. I think Holt published them but
I was just full of that at that time, I guess.
MK: Being full of that, did that help you encourage some of those Negro playwrights that had a chance with the Federal Theatre? Did you get to know any of them?
PG: I didn't, well—
MK: Like Theodore Brown or—
PG: I think Willis Richardson. You don't know his name?
MK: I don’t know Willis Richardson.
PG: And Randolph Edmonds and of course Langston Hughes. I don't know what Langston wrote for the Federal Theatre but he was active along at that time.
MK: I think Troubled Island was one.
PG: Gosh, you all know so much more than I do.
JO: Were you ever, outside of Lost Colony, which I'd like to ask you about in a moment, but were you conmissioned to write other plays? Or were you on a Federal Theatre salary to write plays for the Federal Theatre?
PG: I never drew any salary from the Federal Theatre but Hallie Flanagan—well, I just talk ¹ as you asked me—but Hallie Flanagan was, of course, a good friend of the Roosevelts. And it was partly that friendship and partly, of course, her talent and ability that made her, that she was selected to head this Federal Theatre, part of the WPA (Works Progress Administration), I guess you’d call it, And I got to know her. I don't even know where I first met her. But anyway, I saw her in New York somewhere and told her I was planning this kind of example of the people's theatre, kind of a celebration, you know, to get a lot of the people together. I was interested in the people’s theatre. I'd just read a book by Roirain Rolland called The People's Theatre and I was very much taken with it. And I'd had a lot of beatings around the testes in Hollywood and Broadway. I told her about this project and she said, "Well, that's what we're interested in, too." So through Mrs. Roosevelt was interested in it. And anyhow, I sat down to write this thing and I finally got it written. And we started building the amphitheatre. We had one old mule and a scoop. You know a scoop is for digging. That's all we had and we'd dig the dirt up and this old mule—and we had about 100 or 200 CCC camp boys with shovels.
It was hard to get shovels. So we'd work and work and we finally just gave
out and the slope was too flat. But we quit finally and somehow or other we got enough supplies and tools and lumber and old logs and made palisades. And Hallie Flanagan said, "We'll give you actors to work in it." So she gave us 13 actors in the main parts and they paid their salaries, you see, the Federal Theatre. But I never did. . . 
But anyhow, we finally got it open and Hallie was interested in it. And Mrs. Roosevelt got interested and came down and stayed about two or three weeks while we were rehearsing. And she'd go swimming with the young people and she was really rather homely, you know, Mrs. Roosevelt was. But she didn't mind. She'd get right out there and she didn't have much of a figure either but she was a great person.
MK: Well, was that at Manteo?
PG: Manteo. You see, it's on the sea there. And Mr. Roosevelt, he got interested and he came down during the season and made a speech. They had a one-way bridge over to the island, that's all. But there were nearly 6,000 people came to see the play and to hear him talk. And we had to play two performances. The last performance got through about 3:00 in the morning. He came and he was crippled, you know, and they fixed it so he could bring his automobile right up on the rear row of the seats. And he sat there with his family and saw the play. Later on they put a marker. . . there and a fence around it. The darned thing was always in the way, people stumbling over it.
MK: Did Mr, Selden direct this?
PG; He directed it, Sam Selden directed it. He did a good job, and we had a lot of attention. We had Brooks Atkinson down from New York to give us a review of the thing. He wrote a review that didn't say—he just told about being there
MK: Didn’t address himself to the play?
PG: Well, he gave us news about the play but, well, maybe he said semething. "This is different from the plays Green usually writes." Something like that. And they sent this fellow Hirsch from the New York Times to make some cartoons of it. Time Magazine sent a Louis Kronenberger, I think, came and wrote a review. We had a nationwide hookup of radio, of "Cavalcade of America." So we had a pretty good start with the people's theatre movement. And Hallie got so much interested and she planned—and Kurt Weill came over here, the composer from Germany, and he and I worked on something together. And she got the idea— she came down here, Mrs. Flanagan, and stayed a few days. And we worked out plans with Weill and myself to write a play for the Federal Theatre to be done simultaneously in 70 different centers. I have a part of the script of it here now. Kurt Weill came down and he would stay here and I would write. And he was ready to — so we got way on near the middle of this thing and big plans and we were set. And Mrs. Flanagan called up on the phone and she said, "I've got terrible news." And I said, "What?"
And she said, "They're going to kill the Federal Theatre. " This was 1938 or 1939, well you know. And she said, "Your Senator, Robert Reynolds, from North Carolina is the leader. He's introduced the bill, and can't you do something since he's your fellow citizen?"
I said, "Well, Hallie, for God's sake—"
She said, "They're determined that we're all Communists, and they're going to kill it unless somebody does something. We've been to see Mr. Reynolds and all and I'm appealing to you. Maybe you can—"
Well, I'd known Bob Reynolds and I didn't admire him a bit in the world. In
fact, he came to visit The Lost Colony one night while it was running and he—well, he was a distinguished United States Senator. So we asked him would he make a few remarks ahead of time, just before we started. He said he'd be glad to. And he'd married Mrs, McLean of the Hope Diamond fame and Bob didn't have a dime until he got to be senator, so he was all fixed. He married that girl, the McLean girl. I heard later she wasn't very bright and I thought maybe that was one reason she took Bob. Well, old Bob, he was there and we introduced him and he started making his few remarks. He talked for 20 minutes and we got fidgety, you know, and wanted to start the play. He talked for 25 minutes, 30 minutes, a campaign speech. And finally he said, "I have one more point, ladies and gentlemen, and I'm through." Tremendous applause! (Laugh) It didn't bother the scoundrel a bit. He took a second wind on that and he talked about, I don't know.
And another time he said, "One more point and I'm finished." Big applause. But he was full of brass. He finally sat down. So he knew the sample of the work we were doing out in the country. But he was so convinced that the whole movement, the whole Federal Theatre was just infested with Radicals, Communists. And later, you know, they had a lot of to-do about such boys as John Howard Lawson and Clifford Odets. They had them down in Washington. They never did
bother me at all. Maybe I didn't count enough, but anyway, they sent two newspapermen snooping around and I knew what they were after. And I got up and 
that was the one time I was really profane. . . I hate to repeat what I told them. 
I said, "I know what you're up to and if you write what you say, I'll sue you to hell and gone." Well, I never was hauled up except once, due to my connection with UNESCO. There
was a general that got the idea that UNESCO was also—which was much later— was infiltrated with Communists. And they had us all up - I was on the National Committee, and they had all of us there in Washington. We had this general-— this is not on the point but a sample of the kind of foolishness that goes on. This general—we had the Under Secretary of State, we had the President of the University of Puerto Rico, we had the President of the University of Indiana, the President of the University of Illinois. We had 15 or 20 leading people, and this general who had brought the charge as a taxpayer against UNESCO and this group—we had all been, most of us had been to Paris to an international convention. And over there I had advocated that Red China should be seated. I said, "It is China."
Well, so it started and I was way down the line, but we were sittirg around the room and they asked this fellow, "Have you advocated any time the creation of one world government?" "No, sir."
"Have you ever advocated. . ." and so on.
Well, Hymie—what was his name? Hymie Menendez or Hymie something was sitting right next to me, nice fellow. He came all around, he came to me and I was so sick and sore that I said, "Unless the world unites into one so cooperative, great organization, we're sunk." And Hymie, he moved right away from me. (Laugh) Well, that fellow, the general, he looked at me and he gave me the eye. That's all and he moved on. And I was so ashamed of every single person who—what do you call it—weasled around there and rather than standing up and crying for the United Nations and what it stood for. The husband of Myrna Loy- Myrna Loy was on the Board but she wasn’t present. She’s an actress, you know. It was her husband, a very important man, and he was in the State Department.
He wiggled around. Of course, he wanted to be promoted. Well, it all died out. Nothing happened, txit it’s a funny thing how people—of course, Hallie Flanagan was a fighter but she had no—
MK: What you just described reminds me of a scene from Johnny Johnson when Johnny gets all the supreme ccrananders together but gives them laughing gas when they want to keep on with the war.
PG: Yeah. Isn't that a sight? Oh, my God!
MK: Well, tell me about Hallie Flanagan being a fighter.
PG: Well, anyway, about Bob Reynolds. Bob was broke and, to go back a little, he ran for United States Senator, just in the open. He hadn't had any qualifications, but he had a dramatic—he came here to speak and he had this trick. He drove a T Model Ford and he had a big red carpet rolled up in this old Ford. And when he'd be making a speech about his opponent, Cameron Morrison, who married a millionaire woman. And he said, "Well, when Cameron Morrison," and then he unrolled this red carpet and imitated Cameron Morrison walking up that thing. And he'd always break down out of town without gas, you know. He'd run out of gas when he got to Chapel Hill, down at the edge of town, out of gas. So he gets to a phone and calls Bruce Stroud who runs the Ford and he knows him. He says, "Bruce, this is Bob Reynolds. The damndest thing. . . happened, Bruce, you know. I just run out of gas." So Bruce says, "Be right there." So then he would finally come into town. He had all sorts of tricks. Well, so he got elected United States Senator. I used to laugh. We called him "Our Bob." So I told Hallie, "All right, I'll call him and I'll see what I can do. I'll go up to see him,"
And she said, "The trouble is that he's called for the vote tomorrow at 11:00.”
I think it was a Thursday. "He's sprung this on us. He's called for the vote early."
So I called and he gets on the phone. "Well, Paul, what can I do for you?
You know I want to do anything I can for you." (Laugh)
So I said, "Well—" Then we had it.
He said, "Why, tomorrow at 11:00 the Federal Theatre's dead. We're gonna kill it. Why, Paul, it's full of Communists. Don't you know that? People that want to subvert and gimlet and tear out the entrails of this great country of ours which fought for freedom," and so forth.
I said, "Well, what's gonna happen to all these actors and these scene designers and these people, these artists, these actors, all sorts of people, thousands of them? What's gonna happen?"
And he said, "I don't give a damn."
I said, "Well, don't they get hungry like. . . "     
And then another thing Senator Reynolds said to me, he said, "The thing is so damned expensive."
I said, "I know it's a disguised dole, that's true. But look what we're doing in the arts."
And he gave me some figures over the phone, but I had some figures worse than his that he couldn't match. I had some plays. I lost the script of one called Carolina—I think it was Carolina—that was in rehearsal at the old Adelphi Theatre on 52nd Street—that's gone now. And James Light of the Provincetown Playhouse was directing it, and this is more than typical. They took the play and I went up to see a play that they were doing called It Can't Happen Here by Sinclair Lewis, one of the worst plays I ever saw.
MK: I'm glad to hear you say that. (Laugh)
PG: Well, it was no play. So Jimmy said, "We’d like you to come around to rehearsal."
I said, "Fine." I went around and they were rehearsing. This was in September, I think. I said, "Well, Jimmy, when are you going to open?" "Oh," he said, "we're going to open in October." I said, "Well, fine." I was in New York through October, went around, and Jinny was rehearsing. I said, "Jimmy, that's pretty good. When are you going to open?"
He said, "We're planning now in December." Well, I kept waiting and the last time I heard from Jimmy they were going to, I think, open in February. Of course, everybody was on salary, you see, and there was no need to open. All they had to do was just keep rehearsing and then cashing their checks,
And there was a lot of that went on all over the country. So when Reynolds brought that up, he had a point that I couldn't answer. But there was hardly any reason for that.
And then another thing, they would get playwrights on the payroll who couldn't write a bit, never had written a play. But they'd have seme way of getting on as a writer. And actors—Hallie sent us 13, I think it was, and our leading man was the sorriest actor I ever saw. He was so pitiful! But one or two of them were pretty good. I asked Hallie once where she found these people. 
But anyway, the fact that we had some actors and they were paid—we couldn't have paid them—made it possible for us to get that started. And then others started like that so now we have quite a movement in the people's theatre in the form of outdoor drama that's spreading.
JO: What was the play that you were writing with Weill when the Project closed?
You said you had the script still.
PG: Well, it was a play about the nature of. . . America. I remember the leading character and it was Jonathan, and he represented Uncle Sam. You know, Uncle Sam was Jonathan. And it was laid mainly in New England. Not too long ago I found the script. It had about 70 pages written. Some of it's not too bad and with the kind of music that Kurt Weill was creating. And there was a person down here, Kurt Weill's assistant, last year, with a lot of Kurt's unpublished music that he had sone of that. Well, it was real rough on him because he'd just come here from a tremendous success in Berlin, in Germany with Bert Brecht in the Threepenny Opera. I saw it in Berlin, Elizabeth and I, my wife, in 1928 or 1929, and it was playing in seven cities at that time. And Kurt and Brecht were just getting rich. They were playing in Leipzig, Munich, Hamburg, Dresden, Berlin, anyway, Kurt later told me seven cities.
MK: Is that when you got to know him, when you spent the year—
PG: No, I never met him there at all. I remember the night I saw the show. His wife, Lotte Lenya, was playing Jenny, I think the girl, whatever her name was. But I didn't meet him at all. I only met him in this country.
MK: And who brought you two together?
PG: The Group Theatre. Cheryl Crawford really. I was working on something and Cheryl Crawford called me up one day. This was not the Federal Theatre, but it's an addendum to it. This was in 1936 or somewhere. It was before the Federal Theatre closed, long, because in 1938 and 1939 we were working on this project to be produced. So it must have been about 1936 that Cheryl called me up and said, "Kurt Weill is in this country and we've been introduced to him. He's over here with our Group and we wondered whether you two might get
together on something."
I had been in the war and been a great admirer of Woodrow Wilson. In fact, I followed him to Paris, I was so keen on this "One World" idea." And I stayed in Paris while he was trying to get his treaty through and went everywhere. Every time he'd speak in public, I'd be there. I admired his
great dream. So I'd often thought about it. "Oh, gosh, I wish I could say 
something about war and the killing of people." So when Cheryl said that Kurt Weill was over here—so she and Kurt, I think, came down here. We had a meeting 
and I told him that I'd often wanted to write semething against the war. And I'd just read something and I didn't know how much influence it had on everybody. It was about Good Soldier Schweik. Do you know that book by, what is it, Hasek? And then I'd seen in Berlin Carl Zuckmayer's play, The Captain of Kopenick, a marvelous thing. And then the movie I saw, the damdest thing, really wonderful. It showed a poor guy being let out of jail and he wants a passport but they say, "Out of here." And he gets out and he wanders around and he can't get a job. And they say, "You get a passport and then we'll talk about the job."
"Well," he says, "I can't get a job until I get a passport and I can't get a passport until I get a job. I'm stuck." He's got a few dollars they gave him when they let him out and he passes a pawn shop and he sees this uniform of a German captain hanging there for sale or pawn. And he gets an idea. So he goes in and he buys this thing or rents it. He must have bought it because he didn't have any credit, but it was very cheap. And then the scene dissolves or cuts to a sign, "Men's Room." So he looks around and he goes into that men's room and then you dissolve, riding along the same scene. And there's several fellows wanting to get into this room and they're pacing up and down.
They're really suffering. And the door opens finally and out comes this captain. Gosh, he's resplendent! And they snap to attention. Well, this poor devil, this captain, everywhere he goes, he goes in a restaurant and they serve him, you know. It's on the house. Then he gets on a train and he rides, you know, first class. They don't charge him because he's in the Army. And you cut to a scene outside and here's a station and there's the mayor there and the brass band. They're welcoming a man that's supposed to arrive, but the other fellow doesn't arrive and this scoundrel arrives in uniform. Well, he goes on from adventure to adventure until they finally find him. But it's a whole thing, the power of the form, the outside, the uniform. It was really wonderful.
JO: Have you revised Johnny Johnson for—I noticed when I was on campus this spring that the Playmakers are going to do that. Is that a redoing of your— PG: They haven't got—I haven't talked to the people who are going to do it.
They want to do it in the round, I think. They haven't said anything to me about it, But I've never seen a good production of it in this country. It was badly done by the Group. And Kurt Weill and I, the way we finally got it written, he was wonderfully prolific. We worked here a lot and then in New York.
MK: And I think the Federal Theatre did it once in Boston.
PG: I think so.
MK: In the spring of 1937.
PG: Gosh, you know all about it.
MK: Yeah, I found all of this.
PG: Well, you know, it's running in Helsinki right now. And I wish I could see it because I've never seen a good production here. But the one in Helsinki
has been running since February and they've sent me some reviews and pictures and so on. Evidently they've got a kind of popular comedian playing the part. But when the Group did it, Kurt Weill and I, we just pulled. . . our hair because they insisted on the young people singing these solos. They couldn't sing. Morris Carnovsky did pretty well with an old psychiatrist song. He did pretty good, but the young girl, she couldn't sing. And I tried to get them my best and so did Kurt, to have recitative, but it didn't get anywhere. The very first thing they asked Kurt and me, could we take $100 a week for our commission, our royalty. And Kurt was broke, you see. He needed it. I said, "Sure" because they could cut us, but they couldn't cut the actors on account of Actors' Equity. So that's all we got out of it, $100 a week for a few weeks.
JO: Was this play that you were writing for the Federal Theatre, was that closer to the Manteo play and pageant and peoples' theatre? Or what was it like?
PG: Yes, it was. I was trying to interpret. . . America, and it was laid in New England. . . having to do with the Revolutionary War and the hard times after the Revolution and people were out of work. Just like the Depression and, you know, Shays' Rebellion. Do you remember about Shays' Rebellion in Massachusetts? You see, the people were being sold out and dispossessed and thrown into debtors' prison. And Dan Shay led a rebellion up there and there was a rebellion broke out in New Hampshire and New Hampshire talked about seceding. And New England had a lot of meetings about New England seceding. And there was talk in the South, so it was somewhat like the 1930s Depression. I remember Paul Revere was a character and I don't know where we were going with it but Kurt, he would stay in one room here and he'd turn out the music. And it was real rough on him but he got with Max Anderson. Then he got a job in Hollywood and I saw him in Hollywood. He looked like a million dollars.
When he was down here he had only one suit of clothes, old heavy yam, and it was hot summertime.
MK: But he prospered in Hollywood?
PG: Oh, well, he made a lot of money. He made a lot of money in New York.
In just a few years he was a rich man again.
MK: Well, I saw some letters that Hallie Flanagan was writing you in 1937 about the play you were doing with Kurt Weill. And she was saying, "We're so excited. We're looking forward," and she was calling it Cannon Glory. Did you call it that?
PG: Oh, that's right. I forgot all about it. I called it The Cannon Glory.
MK: But then you did another play that was This Cannon Glory?
PG: Then I gave it the name. (Laugh)
MK: That's why I'm confused. (Laugh)
PG: Say, I forgot all about that. Old Sam Adams up there in Boston made a hot speech and he said, "I want to share the cannon danger and the cannon glory." He was a real firebrand.
MK: That's a beautiful phrase.
PG: And I forgot all about it. That's right. We called it The Cannon Glory and then it was scrapped. And I liked the title. So when I had a chance to do a play in Virginia, we started there and then the war came on and killed it. And then after the war, we revived the idea and built an amphitheatre. And
I thought, "Well, that's a good title. I'm going to use that now and write about Thomas Jefferson and his struggle." And, oh, I got a lot of letters as soon as it got out in the paper from different people in Virginia saying, "We hear you're going to write about Thanas Jefferson. Why don't you write about Patrick Henry?" They loved Patrick Henry and they never have loved Jefferson and never have really loved Washington, I mean the oldtimers. They admired Washington, they took off their hats to Jefferson, but old Patrick Henry they loved. And I said, "I ain't gonna write about Patrick Henry because he was against the Constitution and but he was a great guy in his way.
MK: But you didn't want to glorify him though.
PG: Well, I didn't feel that to follow his thinking and try to show how his actions— they weren't important enough to me. But Jefferson was really dragging the bottom in the thing. He was right there struggling, the basic, and to me, struggling for what a man needs to have.. And of course Henry was very much like Sam Adams. He could rouse the people, but he didn't have the follow-through, the program, as far as I could tell. But the people do love old Patrick Henry.
JO: What other inpressions do you have of Hallie Flanagan really? Did you see her much in those days?
PG: Oh, she was a—in fact, Hallie, when we lost out on this Federal Theatre and she came down here and said, "Is there anything we can do to save this idea?" And then I told her about the possibility of doing another one of these outdoor, big amphitheatre things, which turned out to be The Common Glory. And she said, "I would like to help in any way I can." So she was very cooperative. In fact, she came here again, made another visit and we talked a lot. And I had a friend who had come back from Russia. And he turned himself over to me to be delivered to the law. He had been tangled up in the labor stuff up in Gastonia, and the Civil Liberties Union, Roger Baldwin, had bailed him out for $20,000 and he skipped to Russia. He stayed over there a few years, two or three or four years and wrote a couple of books. He came back to this country and I got a letter from him. He was hiding and he said he wanted to turn himself in and he’d like to come down. Well, he did, he came and delivered himself over to me and I arranged with the governor and took him to the governor. And the governor says, "Well, I'm gonna do something for you because this is a great thing you've done." Well, the governor said, "I'm gonna do this before I go out of office." Well, this governor's term was coming to an end and I called him and said, "What have you done, Governor, about Fred Beale?"
He said, "Nothing, nothing, except to send him to Caledonia." Caledonia was the farm where they send the bad guys.
I said, "What?"
He said, "Of course, Paul."
I said, "Governor, you—"
"Oh, no," he said, "I know I premised but do you know what? I found that
he had. . .  syphilis."
I said, "Well, great God."
"Yeah, he turned himself in here, you know, and at the same time he had syphilis.
And he's a bad fella so I sent him to Caledonia."
Well, I told Hallie about this and she was going to go with me to Williamsburg to figure out a place to do this play, the new Common Glory. And I told her I had this friend down there in Caledonia and could we go by. And I said, "It’s out of the way."
And she said, "Oh, yes, I'd like"—she was so public-spirited and had a real feeling for people. So she rode all that long way with me to call on a friend. But poor Fred, they really had him. He didn't live, he died— MK: Did he die there in the jail?
PG: He died there. And that governor (laugh), a big Baptist, you know.
MK: Which governor was that?
PG: Well, he's got the most fitting name, too. His name was Hoey, Clyde R. Hoey, pronounced "Hooey." A good man in his way, you know, but blinded by fanatical Fundamentalism and the old timey view, cruel as the grave, upstanding though, vestryman in the church, deacon and what-not.
MK: But then that complete blind spot, not understanding his own cruelty.
PG: Come a hard way, you see. But I've been up against them ever since I was a little boy. I know them pretty well.
Well anyhow, Hallie went with me to Williamsburg and we studied the town.
We planned all kinds of ways where we could produce this play. And I don't know that I ever saw her after that. I put her on the train in Richmond and she went back to Vassar and we had some correspondence. Then she got very sick, you know the whole tragic— MK: With the Parkinson’s Disease.
PG: But you never did see her. Well, you’re too young. She was the cutest person you ever looked at. Man, when she walked in a place, with that little hat on, you know, the men all looked. She was just a darling, very small, about, I guess, well five feet one or two, something, but just cute, lovely person.
And underneath it all, real smart. She knew what she was up to.
MK: Did she have bright red hair or brownish?
PG: No, dark hair. It might have been brownish but it was dark.
JO: Did you see her in New York much when you were there?
PG: Yeah, off and on, but she was so busy you had to line up at the door, you know, to get in there. She was quite a big wheel. And I remember that, oh, well, it was years, semetime later—we kept up some correspondence, not much, but she was such a close friend of Mrs. Roosevelt's that something came up and I wanted
to get the President's support for it. And Hallie said, "Why don't you go? Go right to the door." And I don't know what she did. Maybe she prepared the way, but—so I got an invitation from Mr. Roosevelt to came up and talk over this project with him. And I was right there on the spot and was taken into the Red Room. And Mrs. Roosevelt came in. I had met her at Manteo and sort of knew her a little bit. And she said, "Mr. Green, I'm very sorry but the President has just been called to an important"something, whatever it was. She didn't tell me, "But I'm going to see him tonight and he asked that you tell me what your project is and I'll relay it to him tonight at dinner or tonight." So I started out with my spiel and the idea was to try to get money, get their support-—I had a foundation that was willing to do something about it—and to get up an organization for entertainment in the camps and all over the country for the soldiers. You see, the Second World War had broken out. I was ready to talk for about 30 minutes. I must have talked three minutes and she said, "That's enough. I'm all for it. You don't
have to say any more." So I thought, "She's too easily persuaded." But we put it through and not only that, she became the chairman of it. So she said,
"We'll have everything come here, all the reports and the publicity,  and I'll mail it right on to you. We'll have people looking at it and we'll send it on to you for action." Every day nearly I would get a brown envelope from the White House full, of letters and things. And we got money and sent young people, Well, for instance, here. . . the Playmakers. . . sidize a group of them to go to Fort Bragg and play.
MK: Was it the USO?
PG: I don't even know what the name of it, whether we had a name for it. It was some kind of United—anyway, it was entertainment for the soldiers. And they
had it, I think, set up in most every state.
Well, she was wonderful. I know I was fighting a case down here, trying to get some Croatan Indians—-they're not Negroes, but Indians, but they had a separate school given to then by the legislation by force, in a way. And two of them wanted to get into a white school because they lived miles and had to be bussed, you know. They left in the dark and got home in the dark and they passed right by the Dunn High School, a white school. So they brought suit and they lost their case and they appealed it. So I set out to raise some money to try to get the lawyer and I wrote to Mrs. Roosevelt. Right back came a check. She was right in on all that stuff. Well, we did get a lawyer and we won our case and these two Indians got into—two girls. One of them was named Juanita Oxydene or something like that, Juanita anyway. The father had been to see me half in tears, and one day he came by, he and his wife, and had these two girls. And he was as proud as he could be. He said, "I'm taking Juanita to Greensboro to enter the college."
I said, "Wonderfull!"
And he said, "You know, she's been the president of her class in high school." So Mrs. Roosevelt was always interested in things like that.
JO: Let me go back to ask you about the Johnny Johnson at the Group Theatre. If I remember correctly, it was directed by Joe Losey. He went on to direct some other Federal Theatre things and I wondered if—
PG: By Joe who?
MK: Losey.
JO: Losey.
PG: Gosh, I didn’t see it,
MK: Do you know that name? I'd heard that he directed the first time the Federal
Theatre did Hymn to the Rising Sun. Joseph Losey produced it or directed it. PG: Say, that may be—that's the way I met Richard Wright was through this Native
Son production. I mean Hymn to the Rising Sun. In Chicago.
MK: Tell us about the Chicago production of it.
PG: Gosh, I never did see it but I know that Richard Wright played in it. Because later when he and I worked together on something, he told me about it, about his experience in. . . Gosh, I got out there in my cabin where I work, somewhere out there is a telegram from the Mayor of Chicago. I think it was the Mayor, yeah.
"This is to inform you that the play, Hymn to the Rising Sun, is closed by order." They closed it, found it dirty. I'd like to get that telegram for you.
MK: Then she said they did it the next year in New York and it was a big success. PG: Yeah. I remember going to see it in New York. I think Will Geer played in it.
I learned something from that. There are two long speeches in that play, and Will delivered 'em both the same way and that's almost fatal. The first speech was long and the second was pretty long. So the only way that you could get away with the second one was to do it with more fervor, evangelical power or something, or stylized in such a way that it's a step above the one preceding, I mean, as far as I can see. But he delivered it with the same tempo and same—
MK: Because that was the man who was the head of the prison, who gave that Fourth of July speech to the prisoners?
PG: Yeah. My gosh, the mayor's dead and gone, but what would he say now? The only dirt that he would call it in the play was they got a poor little old Negro and put him in the black mariah, in the thing, because they found him, as he says, playing with his private organs. Well, that's what the mayor had it closed on account of just that reference.
MK: Well, I was wondering what you thought of that play because I think it’s my favorite play that you've written that I’ve read, I haven't read that many.
PG: I don't know. Well, you get a lot of help from other people while you're rehearsing and all. I remember in Johnny Johnson we were rehearsing that and there's a scene there somewhere where Johnny's telling the old man that he's in love and his sweetheart wants him to go to war and he doesn't want to go to war. Then the old man says, "You're sort of caught between love and your principle." And he says, "That's right, Uncle Joe" or whatever his name is. And then Uncle Joe says, "I’d give up principle," (Laugh) And then Johnny says, "I can’t do that." Then he says, "Well, you're sunk,"
Well, Art Smith who was playing the part in it, he came up during rehearsal and he said, "Could I add a little something there?" And I said, "What, Art?"
He said, "I'd love to say: 'Then you're sunk like the Lusitania.'"
I said, "Wonderful, wonderful." You see, it brought on an item of the war and finished out the sentence. So that's typical of what you can learn in writing.
So in that Hynn to the Rising Sun, I wrote it and this boy, they bring him out and they beat him. And the editor of the anthology that was getting things together wrote me a letter and said, "Could you possibly do something to obscure this beating? It's so cruel, it’s so brutal right out in front." And I said, "Oh, yeah, I've got the idea." So I had these convicts lined up and he just takes the boy behind and he beats the boy behind the line of convicts and then the power and the pitiful. . . cruelty and all comes through them as they shudder and as they shrink. You see, I got a resonant. And I learned something right there and I saw it so well done in The Great White Hope where the world championship fight takes place off. . . scene. And there's a group of guys watching it. I don't know whether you've seen the play or not.
Have you?
MK: I didn't get to see it.
PG: Well anyway, these guys— they've got a ladder there and one of them would crawl up the ladder and say, "Oh, my, he really hit him bad." The other would say, "Ah!" And the fight is much more powerful in a way through the reaction of these guys. We never see it. The principle of it, the Greeks used it all the time.
MK: How about some of the people that we connect with the Federal Theatre that you might have known, like Betty Smith and Robert Finch? They're North Carolinians, aren't they?
PG: They came here, yes. I didn't know many Federal Theatre people. I just was in and out.
MK: Did you ever know John McGee?
PG: Oh, yeah. I think John put on a Negro play that I'd written. I don't even remember what it was, but I think he did it in a stadium in Atlanta and he had something like 2,000 actors. Have you run across— 
MK: I've never known of that one.
PG: Well, John McGee was a sort of associate something with Hallie, wasn't he?
MK: He directed the whole southern region and then would report to her.
PG: Yeah. He came here a few times and I don't remember what happened.
MK: Do you know what happened to him?
PG: No. Do you?
MK: I don't know. That's what I've been wondering about.
PG: I have a record he sent me a few years ago of something he'd done, some kind of musical thing. But gosh, time is like the devouring earth, you know, it swallows—
JO: What was Frederick Koch's relationship to the Federal Theatre? I understand he was at the University.
PG: Yeah. Mr. Koch I thirds they called him then. We have a Koch here now they call "coke."
MK; But he was Koch.
PG: They called him Koch, a short "o" and then a soft "c" Koch. K-o-t-c-h is the way it's pronounced. He was, I think, either the director for, the dramatic director for North Carolina. We had regions and sections and he was in charge of one of the regions or something. He helped on The Lost Colony but I thought Sara was a little more lyrical director. So Mr. Koch became the supervising director and in that way he was connected with it. And he—well, everybody liked Mr. Koch and Hallie, when she came here we got together. And he was full of encouragement. His philosophy was simply what he said once to me. He said, "People don't need criticism so much. They need encouragement." 
MK: And he encouraged you, didn't he? He was your teacher when you were an undergraduate?
PG: Yes, he gave me a chance to write plays and produce than. He produced than and he cared, you know. He cared about his students.
MK: I once read that he said, "Look to your own traditions for your writing. Look to your own environment." Do you know if that was influenced by the Abbey Players coming to America? Did that help him?
PG: There's a whole long story there. What they did over there in Ireland, Lady Gregory and Douglas Hyde and William Butler Yeats and of course Synge, J. Millington Synge in the background as a writer. He wasn't so much active in producing. But they simply produced the philosophy. Lady Gregory stated it first, that—and of course Mr. Yeats was the lyrical voice of it and he was publishing it abroad—that they would write and produce plays of the imagination that had mainly to do with the Irish folk life and the Irish tradition, heritage, and so on. So it spread. It had a little impact on George Pierce Baker, not much. It had some on Thomas Wood Stevens and around, but most on Mr. Koch, who was then in North Dakota. And he picked up the idea of just what the Abbeys were doing, write about your own life, your own people, your own traditions. Then he came here and this state was full of folklore and the old songs and so on. So what he had was a laboratory and he presided in the laboratory and the kids would all bring in—the whole feeling was one of encouragement.
MK: And that was a play-writing course?
PG: Play-writing group and everybody—you could come in with a little idea.
"How are you coming with your—"
"Well, I've been thinking about so and so. I knew a man once and oh, he was a glutton. And he could eat and oh, he could eat. What do you think of that?" And they'd talk all around and someone would say, "We don't think much of that." Then when you’d get a little script written and bring it in and read it, they would all give you ideas, so it was a community enterprise. And I'm sure that Shakespeare, his writing was that sort of thing. He had this acting group and they'd be talking plays. And he'd go home at night and sit up all night and turn it out.
So I went to Cornell University to do sane—you see, I was interested in philosophy. I taught philosophy even when I was working with him sone. Then I went to Cornell to do graduate work in philosophy and they had a man there, a very brilliant teacher named Martin Sampson who taught play writing. He asked me would I like to come to the class, so I did, not as a student because I was taking philosophy, but I visited the class as an auditor. And he had a big class. He didn't get one play, not one,because when the poor little talent would come out, he would look to see what was wrong with it. He was a brilliant man but he didn't get a one, not a good play at all. You see, he had the wrong method, I think.
But Mr. Koch, maybe you couldn't go too far with that. You'd need further on professional production to really carry it through but we didn't have any theatre. We don't have one still. We had that little theatre that he got. But that's good enough and then you need to be able to carry it on into professional production. So we used to talk about a graduate class, you know, and about creating a professional group here and doing just like the Abbey, go to New York and play three or four weeks in a year. They, you know, go to London and have a season in London. And that was sort of a dream ahead of us when Mr. Koch died. Nothing ever came of it, but it was a good thing. It could have amounted to something, I guess.
JO: How about other people in North Carolina? We mentioned Betty Shiith before. PG: Well, in this play-writing class Mr. Koch, and fron many different people, got little one-act plays that were good enough to be published by a publisher. He got out three or four volumes, I think. But most of them were people who wrote about one play. Now Betty wrote a number of plays. She made her living here somewhat. We got a Rockefeller fellowship for her, but she wrote a lot of little one-act things for Samuel French and I think he paid
her something like $25 apiece. But I had a writing group that met at night once a week and we'd read to one another. We were carrying on Mr. Koch's tradition in a way. He had died in 1945. So one night Betty said that she didn't have a play to read but she had been thinking about a story and she brought some of it to read. I said, "Well, read it." We thought, "Well, it won't be much. She writes plays." So she started reading and she read the first chapter throug that she'd written We just whooped and hollered and said, "Betty, that's wonderful. You just go to it." It was A Tree Grows in Brooklyn. Then she got out of her poverty, you know (laugh) and bought herself a wonderful Cadillac car and wore a gold bracelet around, an ankle bracelet, and all. And we just loved to see it. She was a grand person, wonderful person.
JO: Do you know a play of hers that she was writing for the Federal Theatre called King Cotton? It was a longer play about tenant fanners.
MK: Was it a Living Newspaper?
JO: Yes.
PG: Did she write that for the Living Newspaper people in—
JO: Right.
PG: I'm sorry. We ought to have that. I don't guess we've even got a script in the library. Where did you see that?
JO: It's in the national collection--
MK: The plays we've found.
JO: — that is at George Mason in the library. There's just one copy of it.
PG: Where is that?
JO: It's in northern Virginia, outside of Washington, D.C. And all the Federal
Theatre material has been in storage, in Library of Congress storage, until just this past year.
PG: Well now, what's happening to all that material?
JO: Well, we're now sorting it through and listing it and will catalogue it so it will be available to—
PG: Now, where's it gonna be stored?
MK: At George Mason. The Library of Congress said they didn't want to spend the money to catalogue it. So George Mason said, "Well, may we take it?" And so now it will be at George Mason.
PG: Gosh, I don't know anything about George Mason. What is that?
JO: It's a new university. It's about eight years old. It's a state university.
MK: It was a branch of the University of Virginia that became an independent state university.
PG: Gosh! And subsidized by the state?
JO; Yes. And it's in northern Virginia, just outside of Washington, D. C.
PG: I just yesterday wrote something about George Mason.
JO: I was just going to ask. I assume that you know who George Mason is. Unfortunately, most people don't.
PG: Oh, you know what Jefferson said about him. He said, "George Mason is not only a great man, but of the first order of greatness." And I've got him in this play that I've just finished yesterday, a first draft. I have Mason in it. You see, he opposed the—in a way what I've just written is what I
started way back yonder with Kurt Weill. I'm just trying it again and it's turned out to be awful long but I can cut it. But anyway, Mason opposed the ratification of the Constitution. He and Patrick Henry, dissimilar people with Governor Edmund Randolph in the middle, they kept Virginia from ratifying for a long time although it was Washington's own state. But Mason was truly—the reason he fought it, it lacked a bill of rights, you know, our original
Constitution. And he took the point of view that unless that Bill of Rights is in there now, we'll never get it in it. But Benjamin Franklin in Pennsylvania, he signed it and his group signed it, with the understanding that there would be a Bill of Rights, and so did Massachusetts. And six of the states, prior to the Constitutional Convention in 1787, all had bills of rights in their state constitutions. And then Alexander Hamilton and many others said, "It's all in the document. It starts off, 'We the people of the United States, in order to,' you know,"we do here enact this Constitution."
So I'm calling my thing We, the People. I don't know how far I'll get with it. JO: Is this for the Maryland— PG: I'm doing it for Maryland.
MK: Are you going to have a theatre built and it will be out of doors?
PG: No, no. I went up there to see Governor Mandel months and months ago and Mrs. Wynn, who works for me and with me, she had worked out a budget for him. And we took it in there for the amphitheatre and for the production. It amounted to $870,000, something like that. And Governor Mandel sat there, sinking a little cob pipe—he likes that pipe. He looked out the window. He never did even look at it, and I thought, "Well, this is a cold business I'm in right here."  And after we finished, he turned around in his chair and said, "You don't ask for enough money. Wouldn't a million dollars be better? Wouldn't it?"
I said, "Yes, sir, it would." Well now, they've got him indicted. (Laugh) So I wonder if that's some of that money. (Laugh)
I talked to them yesterday. They are planning to try to do it in the Merriweather Post Pavilion. But they told me over the phone yesterday that they've already rented it and so and so on. We have a chairman. I don't know whether you know her name. Her name is Louise Gore. She ran for governor against Mandel, you know, and boy, she's the most absorbent character that I've ever met. You've heard about a terrapin, how silent he is. (Laugh) She's the most silent character. She can absorb and so I quit trying to call her. So I don't know what they're going to do. I promised to get it done and Mrs. Wynn's looking through it now. Elizabeth read it last night and she said she thought it was pretty good. The trouble in that type of play, of course, is that you're hard up for characterization, for mood, for poetry. And you have to watch it that your theme or your point of view, your intent doesn’t sweep the characters along too fast. But if you invented them, if I invented a love story and I got a fellow in there—
now last night when I was writing the last scene, I felt a little prickle or something back here. On neck I thought, "This must be pretty good right here." He comes in with the news and he gets his girl right there in front of George Washington. Washington’s been opposed to him, but he outwits Washington and all of them and—
MK: And is he fictional, the central character?
PG: No. Washington is sort of the central character, but this young man who falls in love with a girl that lives—Washington took in a lot of relatives, you know, poor ones, and educated them and so I've created an extra one he didn't know about so she's in the family.
But it’s hard to get good actors. I don't know where in the world you'd find a George Washington. He's so sacrosanct but I've tried to make him human. And this boy talks right up to him, too, you know, this young man. This young man had been, in my imagination, he had been a captain in the Army under Washington, in fact was present when Washington hanged John Andre. And he said, "You ought not to have done it. It was wrong." And Washington yells, "But my army was falling to pieces." But there's no reason why the great storehouse of material in this country-— gosh, we've got just subject matter, oodles of subject matter. And somehow we haven't—I once talked to William Faulkner, Maxwell Anderson, William Saroyan, Bob Sherwood, a whole crowd of them. We had a meeting in New York, some kind of meeting. And I brought up the idea of trying to get, you know, them to come in on this people's theatre movanent and write for the people. Max Anderson was very keen on it and William Saroyan was very keen and they both said, "Well, we will." Robert Sherwood, of course, one of the fine men, he was keen on it, too. But Maxwell Anderson came down here and looked around and he decided—he went down to Fort Bragg. And he wrote a play called The Eve of St. Mark, And William Saroyan said, "Yes, I'll write you one" and he sent me a script, the darndest thing. He evidently didn't hear what I was talking about. It was a play called Jim Dandy. Did you ever read that?
MK: No. (Laugh)
PG: Well, we just haven't got the playwrights into this thing. And I don't know, it looks like—
MK: When did we first have any good native drama? Was there anybody before you? PG: Well, William Vaughan Moody— MK: The Great Divide?
PG: —wrote a play back in 1888 or somewhere way back there called The Great Divide that almost had something. It did have something. Percy MacKaye wrote a play called The Scarecrow. It came along much later. And Mark Twain wrote plays, tried to. And oh, way back, and then of course we had people like Bronson Howard and Clyde Fitch. They weren't bad playwrights. And then we had a fellow, Ridgely Torrence, lived in New York, a poet, wrote three fine one-act plays in 1915 called Granny Maumee, The Rider of Dreams and Simon, the Cyrenian, three Negro plays, good, they had something, but little sporadic things. So actually I guess the thing got to rolling in the American theatre in 1920 with Beyond the Horizon. It always happens that there are what you might call martyrs, I guess. They go ahead, you know.
MK: There have to be the pioneers.
PG: And I thought that maybe with The Lost Colony and getting things like that started, that we people would be sort of pioneers, which might help bring on the real mountain-peak writers. Just as in Greece the fellows that preceded Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides and even Aristophanes, they're nameless but there were a lot of them that wrote crude outdoor dramas. And gradually when Aeschylus came along, he had a tradition to build on. Except one play that Aristotle mentions, every play written by those men had to do with the heritage, the myths, the characters, the events of Greek history. That was their storehouse and somehow or other in this country one of the worst things you can do now is go to New York and say, "I've got a historical play here." They say, "Keep on going. Don't even turn in here."
I've got a play here about four fellows that were shipwrecked on an island and they were all homosexual. And they got down so far that one of them cut off his leg and the others ate it. They say, "Well, let me have the script. I want to look at it." (Laugh)
MK: This has promise. (Laugh)
PG: Yes. (Laugh) It has promise. That's the truth though. They'd be much more
interested in that last thing. If I said, "I got a real play here about Thomas Jefferson and his struggles," they'd say,'Well, son, just lay it aside here."
JO: Since the Federal Theatre thought of itself as "people's theatre," did you have a sense of other plays besides Lost Colony that were, you think, as good representatives—
PG: Yes, I think Emmet Lavery wrote one or two. Of course, the things like Triple-A Plowed Under and those Living Newspaper techniques.
MK: Did you go up to see One-Third of a Nation?
PG: No, I didn't.
JO: What were those Lavery plays? One of them was First Legion?
PG: I don't remember. They produced—I know Eranet Lavery lives in California now.
I should have read up on this before you came, but I didn't go to see many plays. I don't know how I got in to see It Can't Happen Here. I just happened to. (Laugh)
MK: You were just lucky. (Laugh)
PG: I guess. But it was about something. Most of the plays I'm sorry are not about anything. But I'd go anywhere to come in on a play like A Man for All Seasons.
I felt That Championship Season was a darned good — it was about something.
MK: Do you get up to New York and see plays?
PG: Yeah, I go every year and I'm going up again right after Christmas if I can find anything to look at. Of course, that's the hotspot place in the—as Brooks Atkinson once said to me, "You have to fight this theatre battle out here in New York."
And I said, "Yes, but Brooks, among the people" and of course I'd just been down in Texas and Louisiana. And I went to see a show—I didn't see it in New York—-called Member of the Wedding, Carson McCullers' play. And they were working hard and this little girl in there—I don't know whether you know the story or not. She was whining and bawling all over the place and doing a good job. And. . . 
. . . very well. Wonderful fellow.
MK: I have one of your scripts and there were about five names written inside and one was Bob Porterfield and one was Will Geer and I figured they were the characters in the play.
PG: Maybe. I think he did play.
MK: Would it have been in maybe Unto Such Glory?
PG: Maybe.
MK: I'm not too sure which one it was but was he an actor before he founded the theatre?
PG: Yes. He acted even after he founded it. He was in Sergeant York. He played a big part in that. I think Gary Cooper played the lead and Bob Porterfield, he was awful good. He and Gary got to a dance. . . and the women were all dancin' and I remember Bob hugging Gary. . . to him, and he said, "Oh, look at that
big woman! Look at that big woman!" That was his line. He was a wonderful fellow. Did you know him?
JO: No.
MK: Didn't know him and I don't know whether he's still alive.
PG: No, he died two years ago.
MK: Did you know the playwright, Arnold Sundgaard?
PG: I've met him. I don't know him very well. He's a man of talent. I don't know what he's doing now but he had talent.
MK: I think he is still writing.
PG: He had sort of a lyrical gift. Another fellow I loved very much was Lynn Riggs. He wrote Green Grow the Lilacs on which Oklahoma was based. Arthur Hopkins produced some of his plays. Lynn used to come down here and stay a lot.
JO: Did you know through the Federal Theatre Halsted Welles?
MK: He directed Murder in the Cathedral.
JO: He was a Yale—
PG: I’ve met him but I don’t know him very well.
MK: Or Philip Barber? He directed some things in New York.
PG: Yes, I’ve met him. But I haven't kept up with it really too much.
JO: Did you have much sense that there was regional theatre before TTP? For instance, in North Carolina? And was Mabie doing anything in Iowa?
PG: Not much you could call a center, I guess. There were two spots, very good. Gilmor Brown in Pasadena and Fred McConnell at the Cleveland Playhouse.
Those were two very active centers of good dramatic work, but they were producing stuff out of New York and also producing some of their native things. But mainly they did the New York plays, but they were real leaders.
MK: So what do you think of the Federal Project, Mr. Green? Do you think that it produced any good playwrights or— 
PG: No.
MK: Did it produce a new spirit for the American theatre? Did it help—
PG: I think—you see, the Ford Foundation, a Mr.—
MK: Rockefeller? Did Rockefeller—
PG: Oh, the Rockefellers did a great deal. They were really—David Stevens was the head—
MK: Did you know him?
PG: Oh, very well,
MK: Because I might go to see him in California.
PG: Will you? For gosh sake, do.
MK: Would he be a good person to go to see?
PG: Oh, yeah. He’s 92 years old, but I had a letter from him day before yesterday just as clear as could be. And last weekend we had a man here from Indiana University, Hubert Hefner. I don’t know whether you know Hubert Hefner or not. And also had Bob Gard, Robert Gard from Missouri—no, Wisconsin, Wisconsin Idea Theatre. And Gard and two fellows in New York are doing a book on Stevens, his work, his Rockefeller Foundation—Stevens, oh, he subsidized every kind of thing in the theatre. So they’ve been going around taping different
people relative to David Stevens. So I said, "While we’re all gathered here doing these tapes, why don’t we call Dave up."
MK: And tell him "Hi." (Laugh)
PG: So we called him up and gosh, he answered the phone just as alert and he appreciated it. I asked him about, "How’s your manuscript, the one you wrote something about education? How’s that coming along?"
He says, "What?"
And I said, "Your book on education?"
He said, "I didn’t write, any book." (Laugh) So later on Gard said he’d asked him and he absolutely blanked out on that. He has no remembrance of that book, but he’ll remember everything else.
MK: And he did write it?
PG: Oh, yeah, I read the script and the hardest letter I ever wrote was to try to—and so some psychologists say you forget what you—you know, what hurts, what you don’t like to remember. But I wish you would go to see him. I have
his address here and telephone number.
MK: Would you give me his address?
PG: Would you like it?
MK: I would love it.
PG: I'll ask Mrs. Wynn. He's at a beautiful rest home, they say. And Bob said— Robert Gard—said that he runs the place.
MK: It could be the very same place that my husband's grandmother lives because it's in La Jolla and I'm going to visit her in about three weeks. So they may be—
PG: I'll ask Mrs. Wynn to bring it.
MK: Well, we can do that in a minute.
PG: Oh, here’s this letter from Dave Stevens right lying here. That's an earlier one but you can see, 92 years old.
MK: What do you think was the problem with the Federal Theatre Project, Mr. Green? PG: What?
MK: What were some of the main problems with the Federal Theatre Project? Was it too hard to have government mixed in with the arts?
PG: Well, maybe we couldn't have done it. But the very fact that Robert Reynolds and the rest of them closed it on the basis of "subversive personnel and practices" would seem to prove that they didn't keep their communications clear, that they let things pile up in suspicion and all, and Hallie maybe— anyway, the question, is: was it true that the thing was full of these Radicals and people who were intent on destroying the Government, which would be silly because it would be destroying the one that was feeding them. But evidently there was some lack of communication there. That was one thing and then, of course, another thing was the tremendous expense of the whole thing. And there you question of the choice of people in the theatre. Maybe it was too—a lot of just dead weight. A lot of people got in on it that had no business to be on it. Now, the WPA Writers' Project got loaded the sane way with people who had no talent but got in somehow, had written something and got on the payroll. And then—I don't know, I just don't know. You could almost ask what was right.
MK: Yeah. What was right about it?
PG: Oh, a lot of things. For one thing, I think it lifted the sense of dramatic literature and dramatic appreciation in the country tremendously. And I think it helped free the American theatre so that the present theatre's complete freedom is partly a result of that although the influences from abroad and all would have seeped in anyhow. Then, of course, thousands and thousands of people got acquainted with plays that never would have got acquainted. And a great many talents had a chance to work that never would have worked and so on. So it was a going enterprise. But I guess the worst thing was the tremendous expense. The result, that is, the dole side of it became so overpowering. Like I was telling you about Jimmy Light rehearsing this play for months and months and months. Everybody on the payroll so it was actually a dole and using the play as an excuse. Well, that was done so much that I think the criticism was right. Well, you could almost ask, what in the heck is it all about anyway? What are we here for? And I don't know any great plays that came out of it. For instance, like the Triple-A or the Living Newspaper technique, I think it helped free the American theatre and helped us, but I don't know any of the scripts. Take the case of music. It did the same thing in American music. . . folk music or the studies and the collections that were brought out. And people went around noting down. There was a lot of that going on.
So I think all in all, the great value, it helped in self-interpretation of this nation and that self-interpretation helps maybe to find not only the values therein but the evils that beset you. So that foolish phrase of Shakespeare's about holding a mirror up to nature, I'd rather have another image. But the interpretation and I guess it helped American. . . this country, helped it to understand itself. But it doesn't seem to have done us much good.
MK: Maybe it would have if the war hadn't come along.
PG: Yeah, I guess the real crushing truths. . .  Maybe if it helped us establish truth about ourselves and the interest and the intent of getting at the truth. But I haven't found—-of course you can always say, like you ... say of religion, maybe it has done as much evil as good. Then you can say, "Well, suppose we hadn’t had it. Suppose Jesus hadn't been bom." But if the theatre and if the literature—to me I think that the literature or the arts of the nation are the fire and fervor of the people's lives and without them, you know, the people perish and so on. But, gee whiz, you seem so helpless here. In two wars we've killed nearly 50 million people. And you say, "Why?" Well, of course, for empire and lust for power and patriotism. And now we even got into religion again between the Irish and the Middle East killing each other in terms of religion.
But I think that—what I’ve observed is that people-scientists, artists and so 
on- people working together, they don't want to fight and kill each other. They want more of the same enjoyment and so on. So I guess that's our program. What are you going to do with all this now that you're—
JO: What we're trying to do is make it available to people who want to study the Federal Theatre and the same thing would be true of the tapes also.
Eventually we'd like those—of course, with your permission—available to researchers. We're interviewing people who wrote for the Federal Theatre, who acted, directed, did scenic and set design. We plan to have that as part of the collection. It's a ways away. We need some money to— PG: Now, where will the money come from to— JO: The University's been sponsoring it some, but it's through a large National Endowment for the Humanities grant that we hope to get that will develop the real strength of the collection.
MK: So it comes back to the Government. (Laugh)
PG: Well, that's the cost of freedom. We have the power to create taxes and coin money and so on. Well, how many students in this new university?
JO: There's about 8,000 students.
PG: No!
MK: Can you believe that? It's sprung full-bloom from—
PG: Now just where is it?
MK: Fairfax.
JO: Fairfax, Virginia.
(Inaudible)                                                       
PG: Alexander Hamilton, Rufus King, James Wilson. . . Robert Morris there in Philadelphia.
Robert Morris supported the Revolution, you know. He was a rich man and he was the Secretary of, the Treasury or whatever you call it under the Articles of Confederation. He got out and raised money and when he couldn't get the money he staked his own money. Later that man went broke and went to debtors' prison. And I have a little scene where he was to come in and the old Negro servant. And this young man, my hero, says, "Well, now, General Washington, he'll certainly help you." And this Billy Lee, his
servant, said, "Uhuh." He said, "The General, he stays out of other people's business except when he wants to borrow some money hisself."
Well, there were 25 or 30 first-rate men. Reger Sherman from Connecticut, a fine, first-rate man. And why, there they were doing in the wilderness. And we got none today. I don't know anybody. We got Fords and Nixons and Wallaces. Well, we got Hubert Humphrey. He may be a good man.
MK: He has a good heart.
PG: Yeah. I went to the groundbreaking for the Kennedy Center. The coldest day I think I ever saw. They had everybody there. And then we all adjourned to the State Department building and had a—Hubert Humphrey was the speaker and he spoke on the place of the arts in American life and he was good. Oh, boy, he was good. I was seated with Cheryl Crawford and some judge. And the judge said, "Oh, oh, he'll never quit.!" (Laugh) And he talked a long time, but it was good all the way through. He's a wonderful man.
MK: We need people with idealism, don’t we?
PG: Yeah. And ideals, which really are idealism. And we’ve got ourselves in, well, the incredible irrationality of creating destructive power when we’ve already got a hundred times too much. And we keep creating it and creating power that we cannot use. And we have a fool like this man Schlesinger talks about the "first strike” I don’t know whether you read it or not but the other day, some weeks ago, he even talked about "the first strike' against the Russians.
MK: It would be the last strike as well as the first strike.
PG: The first strike. So man with his technological devices which were meant to free the man for the service of man, it looks as if he’s gonna get himself in complete bondage to them and they have taken charge of him. 1984 is coming sooner than you expected.
MK: It's coming along soon, isn’t it?
JO: What do you think was the significance or what effect did it have that this was a physically new country? In other words, that we were able to get away from England which had established institutions that we are now established.
PG: I think so. There was that and somehow it got to be the custom to take interest in state affairs. Rather than getting fame as with riches and so on, they got fame as statesmen, as men in the service of their country and government. And somehow they accumulated this Hebraic, Greek and English enlightenment and so on. You don't know it, but Washington, old Washington, he worked hard. He never subscribed to any books or anything, but for a while there he read Plato, John Locke, Montesquieu, trying to find out what sort of government we ought to have.
JO: Imagine someone reading those now and starting a government fresh.
PG: He gave a lot of warnings. He warned against the party system, you know. Of course, the party now, we've got the biggest thing with a president, when we elect him, is his party and getting reelected or seeing that somebody in his party does get elected. And Roger Sherman introduced in the Constitutional 
Convention, he wanted to see the President elected for one term, seven years, and he’s out. Well, Alexander Hamilton, he said, "No, let's elect him for life. Then he'll be above temptation." (Laugh) Yeah, Hamilton wanted it for life and with absolute veto, once he vetoed something. Of course, they all hollered "Monarchy" and "king" and so on.
But I believe, and I've been around a lot, all around the world for the Rockefeller people, studying different countries. I don't know too much,
but I have a belief that we've got a very wonderful system on paper. Anyhow, we've got the scripture to go by. So have the Russians their way. What you might call their "constitution" is terrific. Talking about service to the people and all and they won't even let Sakharov go and get his Nobel Prize.
They've got people in jail. But we really got down to low business when we're going around plannirg to assassinate people.
MK: Getting to be time to start fresh, isn't it? (Laugh)
Mr. Green, how long has it been since you stopped writing your more native drama plays when you had all of the black people and the tenant farmers, and you went to the outdoor drama? And then you've never gone back to the Negro— PG: No, I haven't. I don't think, I think since 1945.
MK: Did you sort of go through a phase and then you had written out?
PG: Well, I don't understand it. My wife always says, "Why don't you get back to it?" And I've heard people say, "Why don't you do something worthwhile?" Well, I don't know. I keep — This thing that I'm working on now, I feel that it is a challenge to get some real characterization. And I don't know, I'm kind of stubborn, I have a feeling that these people and this storehouse of material, that somehow there is. . . stuff there that's important. And the last thing I did, I did a movie about a fellow who—a kind of folkish thing—who turned himself black and lived as a black man.
MK: Was it Black Like Me?
PG: Yeah, Black Like Me. I wrote a script out of that. And I had a real—I thought it worked out. It wasn't in the original book, but, you know, you could start turning white, one of the great excitements long ago. So I had this black fellow. He's indicted and he's in the courthouse being tried. And we have several dissolves, and right in the middle of his great speech in his defense and so on, he starts turnin' white. And there's a great stir, "My God, this is a white man."
I don't know what ever happened to that. I turned it in but I never did see it. I think they produced it. I tried in the movies a lot to do something about America and always they said, "Oh, don't start preaching."
MK: Did you ever write anything that came through on the screen that you were happy with?
PG: Not very happy any more than I was ever happy with any of these plays. Gosh, I fought with Orson Welles about Native Son when I did the dramatization for that. I finally gave up and I said to the writer, "It's your book." It was a dramatization of Native Son.
MK: Last year a theatre did it in Washington, Back Alley Theatre, and it was so popular that it ran for about three months.
PG: Yeah, and I went up to see it. They asked me up, and the fellow had taken it and what I had written, he just used that as something to—he had the most vile language, four-letter words and all that stuff. And he had the people sitting around eating it up. (Laugh)
MK: And you didn't remember writing that down? (Laugh)
PG: No. The next day I asked him, I said, "By the way—" He said, "I kept thinking that I'd come down to Chapel Hill and go over the script with you." I said, "Well, why didn't you?" But he had some good stuff in there. He had the young man in a death cell and in the original play that's the last scene. But the young man's in the death cell when the light comes up. And he remembers, and everything comes in and the story is induced into the scene by way of his remembrance. It all happens, right in the death cell and at the end where he's executed, he does it with a spasm of body suffering a choreographed kind of a thing. And it was very effective. But I couldn't get over all those words that he put in there.
I've got these three plays that I'm working on now. I've just finished one. I've got two more to go. I think then I will try my hand again at seme of those things. I've got the story of a young Negro that I think about a lot in this young age who tries to come to—
MK: Are a lot of your black plays popular right now and being produced?
PG: No, not now. They were for a while, but not now. And I can see why because there's a sort of resentment in the young, the Negro people. They find— MK: They don't want to see that image of the Negroes.
PG: No, they don't. I remember when I was doing a play way back about a Negro and I got Paul Robeson in, a man I admired tremendously. So he came to a reading of the play and when we walked out, he was so silent and he said, "I know you—" "Well," I said, "of course, we'd like you to play in it, to play the lead."
He stopped and he said, "I wouldn't." He said, "You have this man there being debased, undergoing debased treatment by the white man, and I wouldn't play such a part."
Well, of course, there he had his sociological and racial feeling in front of his feeling as an artist. But then that feeling got the best of him and he finally went to Russia and got all tangled up and lost his effectiveness. Great tragedy. I sought him three years ago. I tried to do something about him. I wrote some letters and tried to get somebody to find him. We never were able to locate him. Then the town here, Greensboro, they decided to have a Paul Robeson honor and just to honor the man. So we tried especially to locate him to give him some kind of a medal or something and we never could.
And I got my agent working on it and we just ran into a. . . 
(Silence 30 sec.)
I think, I've ccme to the conclusion that the greatest sin that any of us can commit is to cause somebody else to miss his life, just to miss it. That's . . . an old story with me. . . You say somebody died for so-and-so. And I say. . . "There's nothing in the world you can think of worth dying for. The thing is himself and he's worth it all. Let him live for himself. You take his life away and he's nothing. You can, say, put on a tombstone, 'He died for his country.' Well, that's nonsense. So let the young people live, let them not die."
Last week I was in Austin, Texas, and I went out to see LBJ's Library that they've got there. Terrific, beautiful. And all the time seeing all these honors and things, I kept thinking of Viet Nam and fifty-five thousand dead men. Cruel. Not a word about--
(Mrs. Green serves refreshments)
JO: Do you still write, Mrs. Green?
MK: We were reading an article about folk playmaking by Frederick Koch this morning and he talked about Elizabeth Lay's plays. (Laugh)
ELG: Yes. Well, I did write the first play that the Playmakers produced. I was in that first group while my husband was still off in the war.
PG: We were just talking about all these great men that we've had.
MK: And where are they?
PG: All our genius now is going into the engineers, you know, the creative inventors who are making great skyscrapers. That's where our power and the tremendous—
Well, you can tell them something about Hallie Flanagan,Elizabeth, can’t you?
MK: Will you tell us some things about Hallie, if you remember.
ELG: Oh, she was a very striking looking person.
PG: I was just telling how cute she was.
ELG: Lovely, lovely hats. She was quite small, short, but she could wear good big hats.
PG: We haven't got any pictures of her, have we? Well, it's in the book.
ELG: Just that one on the jacket of the book. If you want a picture, I just happened to come across that one of you and DuBose Heyward and Koch together.
PG: Hallie's not in that.
ELG: No, no.
PG: No. But they were just telling me about something I knew nothing about, the George Mason University, 8,000 students already out there.
ELG: Where?
JO: In northern Virginia, in the suburbs of Washington, D. C.
MK: In Fairfax, Virginia.
ELG: I think I've heard of that. It's quite new, isn't it?
JO: Yes. It was actually a small extension of the University of Virginia, but                                                     
it’s been about 8 years, I think, that it's been separate.
ELG: Our son-in-law taught at Richmond University for several years.
MK: Are they still in Richmond?
ELG: No, they’re in Oklahoma now.
PG: She just came from there day before yesterday. They've been over in Greece, the kids.
JO: And they just came or have you just come from Oklahoma?
(Conversation about various things)
MK: I was reading your play, The House of Connelly, and Uncle Bob was quoting so much Greek and Latin.
PG: They asked me, "What do you think of Lionel Barrymore for Uncle Bob?" So Lionel Barrymore played it. But the head of the studio told me the reason he wanted to buy that story was that he wanted Mrs. Connelly—no, he wanted a great Southern mansion with a swing under the big trees and swinging the girl that's playing the lead, have her sweetheart swinging her back and forth and she would have to swing back and forth, back and forth. He said, "I just love to watch her swing." Then he said, "We want to have a fadeout with Mrs. Connelly, with the old Connelly plantation all rejuvenated and growing great gobs of tobacco. And she has a diamond ring and she will have a cigarette and she'll be smoking a cigarette. And we'll have a closeup of her hand knocking the ashes off and this diamond ring sparkling.”
MK: That'll be the New South.
PG: That's the New South. So then they got this Reginald Berkley to write the script. He'd never seen a bit of tobacco. Every once in a while he'd come to me and say, "Green, I don't know what I’m doing here. Can't you help me out on this thing?" That was sorry, sorry, maybe as sorry as "Beacon Hill," from what I hear. Did you see any of that?
MK: Just one time was enough and that was it.
PG: Is that right?
MK: I didn't like it.
PG: Elizabeth saw one or two and she thought it was terrible, MK: It was bad.
PG: How could they do such a thing? There were two pages in The Christian Science Monitor last week about it, going through it and telling it. And there were a
couple of columns in The New York Times and it ended, as I remember, "It's like looking at a sleek car. You go and you lift the hood and it doesn't even have a motor." You remember that, semething like that?
MK: That's what "Beacon Hill" was like.
Have any of your plays been done for television?
PG: I don't think so. Maybe one or two but I don't remember. I remember just one that was done. I acted in it in New York. It was one of these historical plays. It was about George Washington or anyway he was in it. And right in the middle of it they slid a commercial in it. I didn't know what to do. It was the Gulf people and I heard this noise and they were squirting and they were selling Flit. They faded away from George Washington and went to selling Flit, killing flies. That's the truth. And they said, "You come around in the morning and we'll have a check for you, for your part in it." I was just one of the crowd, that's all, I didn't have any lines so the check would be such-and-such. So I got home and I couldn't sleep. My face was burning and the heat was just terrible. And then suddenly I realized I had that makeup on that they'd given me. And I was so mad I didn't even take it off. So the next day I went around and an old student of mine was in there, in the business there. He had the check and I told him I didn't want it. He said, "What?" And I said "No, I don't want it." I never did, I left it. It wasn't too much, $142 or something like that. But I was so ashamed of what they did. Well, they didn’t think—they thought, "This fellow's queer. He is queer." But I was so disgusted. And of course, that was simple. They do that all the time.
MK: Unless it's a play on Educational Television and then there are no commercials.
PG: I thought some of these Negro plays might go but I haven't fooled with it and I
have an agent who is really a publisher by the name of Samuel French. They publish all my stuff and have for years and years. But in Hollywood, of course, you have a separate agent. But I got so worn out in Hollywood. I went out there with great hopes.
MK: Did you ever know Emmet Lavery or Howard Koch or the people—
PG: Yes.
MK: Some of the Federal Theatre people went out there.
PG: Yes, they were. Koch, Emmet Lavery, the fellow that wrote Gold Eagle Guy,
Melvin Levy, he was out there. There were a lot of fellows out there. Of course, the purge came along and they got a lot of high complaints— John Howard Lawson—Lawson in a way deserved—
MK: You don’t think too much of him?
PG: I liked him. He wrote Roger Bloomer and some others.
MK: Processional. Did you like Processional?
PG: Processional and he wrote a very good book on the drama.
Well, he used to go around out there and I mean, he deserved some kind of reprimand. I remember at UCLA (University of California at Los Angeles) one night, they were having a discussion on music and politics or something. And they had Emil Ludwig, the German biographer and they had three or four
people. I was talking on, folk theatre or something. And out in front, as people would come in, John Howard Lawson and several of these boys were
picketing because of Ludwig. He was there. And then they went on in the hall and I remember Lawson said to me, "What in the hell are you doing here on the program with this man, Ludwig? Don’t you know he’s a Nazi?"
And I said, "No, I don’t." I didn't know it. I still don't know it. "Well," I said, "Ludwig has written a lot of very fine biographies,
one about Goethe. Also he wrote one about Napoleon."
Well, we get in there and these boys, they hiss and hoot. They had a big crowd. And Ludwig, I remember he said, "Arts, music, literature can flourish whether it's a democracy or a dictatorship." Gosh, a storm broke out when he used the word "dictatorship.” They were so truculent and belligerent. Well, I mean, Lawson said to me, "Heads are gonna roll in this country. Heads are gonna roll." And the dancer in the Group, a very fine dancer, Tamiris — I don't know whether you ever heard of Tamiris. She looked at me and she said, "And in the Revolution it'll give me pleasure to cut your throat." She
said that to me. I said, "Well, your eyes are so pretty, in the Revolution. . .
I hope I get a chance to kiss you." I never did have any more talk of that.
But these boys were—-
MK: Was Hallie Flanagan naive? Did she know it was all going on? Was she trying to keep a rein on things?
PG: Well, I think Hallie was very much like Professor Koch. They were sort of her children and she loved them all and—so in a way she was naive in not sensing the power that was rising against her. I mean it's far too late to talk with me and say, "Paul, try to get Bob Reynolds to do something" when it's all too late. It should have been earlier. I don't know whether she ever went and sat and talked with him in the early days and explained to him. It was a lack of communication and, a lack of Madison Avenue salesmanship. Because all the other things sort of went along at normal course and they faded out when the time came. I certainly hope you'll do anything you can do to honor Hallie Flanagan.
I didn't see a Norrie Houghton. Do you know Norris Houghton?
MK: I've read one or two of his books.
PG: He followed her there at Vassar and I used to get news out from him about her sickness. She became—-well, it’s sort of shocking to you young people but now when I read about a friend dying suddenly, I don't feel so bad. I think it's a pretty good way to go. I've seen so many of them force around their days, you know.
MK: She was sick for over 20 years, wasn't she?
PG: Quite a while. She had Parkinson's Disease. We have some friends over in a rest home here and we go once in a while to see then. And the indignity that the evening of life to approaching death, the process that provides is so, I guess the word is shaming.
MK: Is Hallie Flanagan's brother still alive that lives in Evanston, Illinois? He was about 10 years younger than Hallie. And he said that Hallie Flanagan adnired you the most of any man that she ever worked with in the theatre.
You and E.C.Mabie were her two favorites.  
PG: I'm glad to hear that because we got along awfully well. I didn't see too much of her, but she was here once and Mr. Koch—when I was a freshman here they
had a contest, a play. And I'd never seen a play before somehow and they got me 
to enter the contest and write a script. I think maybe I’m the only one that put a script in. But anyway, they said, "Well, you win the prize" and they were gonna produce the play. Well, they produced it and I was a freshman here.
They produced it outdoors on a bank in the forest. Mr. Koch had—he came here when I away to the war and he loved this little bank because it was like his Bankside Theatre in North Dakota. Well, it was the worst place in the world for an amphitheatre so when the WPA came along and he could get some funds to build an amphitheatre, he wanted to build it there. Well, there was a road came that way just beyond the stage and one this way and there was a
dormitory going up right here. And down in the forest was a beautiful place.
Well, I argued with him, "Mr. Koch, you can’t put this thing here."
And so Hallie — I said, "Hallie, go out there with us,"—she was here—"and maybe you can explain to Mr. Koch. He's just set on this place and it’s the worst place." So she went out and in her quiet, sweet way, she suggested that you'd have to cut off this street when you had a performance on account of the noise because it came right by. And the one beyond, you'd have to stop that off. But he wouldn't listen and I got mad and argued. And she took me aside and she said, "Don't do that. . . Let him have his way." She was very sweet.
MK: And so it got built?
PG: It's right there, yes. And it's a terrible place. But they put on a production once in a while up there. But he loved it. He put some Shakespeare— he liked to act. He loved to play Mercutio, with the feather in his cap and the sword. He loved to play that. He was a very good actor, too. He read A Christmas Carol in the grade schools,
MK: Did you ever get to go up and see any plays that Hallie Flanagan directed?
PG: No.
MK: Not to Vassar?
PG: No, I didn't. I wish I had but I was always—you see, I taught a full load here all the time.
MK: That's what I was wondering. When you speak about teaching all the time and went to waiting, did you always keep both going?
PG: Well, I kept a typewriter right near my classroom in a little office and I'd teach a class and dart in there and write on a story or something.
Then I'd have a seminar once a week at night. I don't know, you do a lot 
of work somehow. But I taught philosophy about 20 years, I guess, and wrote on the side. Then I got so broke. The family increased. I just had to go to Hollywood and I used to go out there a lot and make more there in two or three weeks than you'd make in a year teaching here. Then I loved the medium.
I think the camera is the one democratic instrument for art that the technological age has produced. It has a perfect ear and a perfect eye. It sees everything, hears everything, and can produce it. It can do anything. I used to sit at my typewriter and I’d say, "Well now, I can start with the house burning down or with a horse race, anything. And with the stage, at once you’re limited."
But the weakness of one is the strength of the other and the strength of one is the weakness of the other. So they both are great arts and one doesn't hurt the other.
But I just loved it and I wrote freely out there. I wrote many films. Then pretty soon I found, oh,—you see, I wanted to try to grow, I guess, and never write that again. And I found myself again and again stymied and running into play doctors.
MK: You mean, you never had a great experience of no play doctor or a script that got to oome out the way you had thought it should.
PG: Yes, the very first script that I wrote was done without changing a word.
I did it for Daryl Zanuck and I have his book here, Daryl Zanuck, the producer. You know who he is, don't you?
MK: Um, I was just reading an article about his son who—
PG: Yeah, who took over. So I wrote a farm story about a tenant farmer. I'd grown up with tenants and this tenant farmer, young boy, he gets a job in the store of the landlord. And the landlord has a young daughter and this daughter falls in love with the young fellow and gets to playing with him and he's in
love with her so it's — he has a country tenant girl in love with him.
So I wrote it and Zanuck called me in and he had the director and all and he said, "I want this script shot without changing a word."
So I wrote a piece about it for the Theatre Arts, Mrs. Edith Isaacs, talking about the freedom of the writer in Hollywood. That's the last one I ever wrote that wasn't changed. I went on the lot when they were shooting it and I heard a fellow—he was sitting on the steps waiting to go into his part. He was an old ragged tenant fanner. His name was Henry B. Walthall and Henry B. Walthall was the Little Colonel in The Birth of a Nation, a great star. And here he was an old—-but he was a good actor. And they didn't know me from Adam and one of them was saying, "What do you think about this script we've got?" And the other one said, "It won't make a dime." That's the way they—
I had a funeral in it and I came back to Chapel Hill and a boy said, "I saw this film you wrote the other day. And the people really laughed."
I said, "What were they laughing at?
He said, "That funeral."
And I had a funeral of the tenant farmer played by Henry Walthall and I just decided I'd take it with a camera that would be like a sparrow's eye up in a tree, you know, sparrow watching the thing. You could do anything with it. Well, this is a great. . . medium and like television being Industrialized, when it 
was created for—but maybe it's not as shockingly shackled as television. 
Television is now so—you've got a little bit on Educational and PBS, something like that. I went over to
Russia. Of course, in Russia you would never see such violence or anything like that but you just get bored to death with propaganda. But I would think between the two, we were worse than that, more vicious and I think that's partly the result of—I mean our condition is partly the result of bastardizing our medium of communication.
(End of tape)